[Transcript missing]
We've got a lot to cover.
It's been an exciting year in HPC.
Today we're going to cover and touch
on some of the HPC trends and showcase
the major deployments of some of
Apple's larger HPC deployments.
We're then going to survey the
HPC technologies on the platform.
There's a very wide range to choose from.
We don't have time to talk about each,
but I should point out there
are representatives from
many of these projects,
many of these companies
in the room today,
and thank you for coming and thank
you for your support on the platform.
We are next going to cover the two
major high performance interconnects
available on the platform,
MirrorNet and Infiniband.
And next,
we're going to take a survey of the
tools available on the platform and get
a very important update from Absoft,
who are going to let us know about
everything in their portfolio and
what they're doing on Mac OS X.
Finally,
we're going to give you a glimpse at
a very interesting HPC technology,
and then we'll just go ahead
and wrap up after that.
So it's pretty clear to
almost anyone that is building
high performance clusters,
rather high performance computers,
that clusters are rapidly becoming
the predominant way that we
build and put together high
performance compute environments.
This chart represented,
this chart put together at the last
Supercomputing Conference tracks
the major supercomputer
architectures going back to 1998.
So we've got 500 systems
going back from 1998.
In orange at the bottom are clusters.
We can see that as they gradually rise,
they push, they have displaced other
architectures on the platform.
Clusters, just about everyone knows,
are the predominant way,
and this on our platform is
personified in the XSERV G5.
The XSERP G5 is the
foundation for clusters.
There have been a tremendous
amount of HPC deployments,
tackling a very broad range of
challenges in high performance
computing and the sciences.
Let's check in with some
of the largest ones.
Probably the most famous one
and well familiar to all of
you is Virginia Tech System 10.
System 10 this year converted from
dual 2 GHz Power Mac workstations
to 2.3 GHz XServe G5s.
This allowed them to reduce their
footprint by two-thirds and pulled
a 425 kW load down to 310 kW.
Major savings in power and
the concomitant heat that has
to be managed out of that,
again, that problem becomes
even more manageable.
This year they generated a 12.25
Teraflop run and qualified as number 7
on the top 500 list of supercomputers.
And they remain the
largest academic cluster.
We think they're going to get
some competition this coming year,
but are still definitely the largest
and most powerful academic cluster.
They entered production
this year and they,
what's very exciting,
as not only an HPC cluster
for researchers,
are also a technology test bed.
And in fact they welcome new
technologies to the platform.
If, say, someone wants to do a
scalability test and see if the
new technology can come over,
if you contact them,
they are very willing to
entertain such requests.
So we're very pleased,
very excited at the work
that Virginia Tech's doing.
Another very exciting cluster this year,
the UCLA Dawson Cluster.
The Dawson Cluster
investigates plasma physics.
It is a mix of two 128-node systems,
one composed of 2 GHz XServe G5s
and the other of 2.3 GHz XServe G5s.
Runs over GigE, leverages LAMMPI.
This system entered
production very quickly,
and they were able to generate just
on one of those 128-node sides,
just shy of a teraflop run,
which actually qualified them last
year as number 444 in the top 500 list.
Since then, using Dagger Research Pooch
Pro and MacMPI,
they generated an even higher run.
I think this shows, though,
that 128 nodes is within the
reach of a lot of your devices.
It's one of the top 500 universities,
and frankly, that can qualify as one of
the top 500 supercomputers.
Of course, we have to mention one
of the largest systems,
COLSA.
The Mach 5 system in Huntsville,
Alabama investigates
hypersonic missile research.
These are incredibly dense
CFD codes that are running on this
very large collection of systems.
This system has seen a lot
of development this year,
and again,
is crunching those very large CFD codes.
So, fantastic system.
At University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign,
they stood up the Turing
Cluster this year.
This is used by their
CSE department and the Center for
Simulation of Advanced Rockets.
So, imagine the very complex CFD analysis
that has to be done as you're burning
away solid motor fuel in a rocket.
And that's exactly what
they're simulating there,
among other codes.
We think this is going to be a very,
very high performing system.
It's 640 nodes.
It's a very high performing system.
It's leveraging the
mirror net interconnect.
The system was budgeted around 3 million,
and we think it's going to
place very well on the very
soon to forth come top 500 list.
So, outstanding work there
at Urbana-Champaign.
Another fantastic cluster that you
may have heard of that did generate
some press is the XSEED cluster at
Bowie State University in Maryland.
So this system again is 224 nodes
leveraging the mirror net interconnect,
and they generated a 2.1
teraflop benchmark run.
And so naturally we think they'll make
this next list that comes out shortly.
It was really fun to watch the progress
of this system because this system
was student and faculty planned.
It was an incredibly useful teaching aid,
incredibly useful learning
aid to help teach HPC and
CSE material for the campus.
So well done.
Now for every large system that makes
the list and makes a lot of headlines,
there are dozens and
dozens of smaller systems.
And this is probably best personified
in the Apple Workgroup cluster.
The concept here is that we take it
about as far as you can possibly get
to true turnkey cluster computing.
Very well integrated set of applications,
the hardware is integrated,
all the technology pieces that comprise a
cluster are all very tightly integrated.
Inexpensive enough and with enough
performance that these types of machines
are within the reach now for workgroups,
desk side, departments,
discretionary budgets,
and we've even seen people
enter it into grants and then
be awarded funds for a grant,
purchase the cluster and away they go.
So it really can scale to fit
a very wide variety of needs.
I should point out it makes a very
nice dedicated x-grid cluster as well.
So it takes a lot of technology,
a lot of technology to make a cluster.
All of the technology,
and we've represented them from the
hardware at the bottom up through the OS,
hardware interconnects, the middleware,
all the way up to your application,
which is what we want to get at.
So there's all this technology,
there's a very rich array of technology
on the platform for you to choose from
when you're building your cluster.
I should point out that we don't
have time to talk about each of them,
but we'll call out unique developments
that you should be aware of
that have happened this year.
At the hardware layer,
now we do know that it's
primarily for visualization.
Many people are using the
Power Mac G5 because it can
host very fast graphics cards.
So we do know that the Power Mac G5
remains probably the leading choice
of people doing visualization in HPC.
And we do know that people are trying
to build very large collections
of Mac minis for X-Grid research.
However,
That would be quite fun to play with.
But the XServe G5 remains the primary
building block of building clusters.
The 64-bit computing,
the massive amount of memory available,
amazing amount of performance power,
all told,
make it an extremely well-balanced,
basic building block of a cluster,
with fantastic I/O throughput,
very good environmentals,
and excellent processing power.
Major developments here are that we now
support up to 2GB DIMMs on the XServe G5,
and if your wallet can stand it,
and you can afford to max out 2GB chips,
you can fit up to 16GB of
ECC memory on the Power Mac G5.
So at the OS level,
Tiger landed a tremendous amount
of benefit of immediate interest
and use for HPC customers.
Of course, 64-bit memory address space,
being able to run and build 64-bit
applications using Xcode 2 and GCC4 with
the GCC4 underpinnings is of immediate
use and benefit to our HPC customers.
For those of you that have had many trips
to SysControl to tune kernel parameters,
we want to guide you to
have a look at LaunchD,
which is a way to set global
system-wide kernel parameters.
ManLaunchD gives you a
wealth of information,
and I'd like to point out that at the
large system administration session,
Josh Durham of Virginia Tech is
going to take you through
exactly how he leverages LaunchD.
ManLaunchD and Tiger, to do exactly that,
tune his systems for HPC environments.
One of the things you may have
heard at Virginia Tech was
that for very large systems,
if you want to eke out the very last
mile of performance on your HPC codes
across a very large number of systems,
you would like to have physically
contiguous memory to be available
to those HPC applications.
I am very pleased to tell you that
Apple's DTS department has written code
on Tiger that does exactly that for you.
So if you are an HPC customer and
you know exactly what you're doing,
this code I think will be
very instrumental in helping
show you how to get even more
performance out of your HPC codes.
And if you would like to see that,
I recommend you have a look at
Friday's session on debugging
parallel applications where
that will be introduced.
that would be introduced in that session.
So moving up through the
hardware interconnects,
we have a broad range of
choices in the gigabit Ethernet.
A company by the name of Smalltree has
actually taken a very early lead in
writing Mac OS X drivers for gigabit
Ethernet cards from a number of vendors.
So they in fact offer one, two,
four and even six port
copper gig E cards,
and then that combined with 802.3ad runs
very nicely in a server environment.
They also offer one and two port
optical gigabit Ethernet cards.
So if you already have an
optical infrastructure and
want to do very long runs,
this is an excellent choice.
Surprisingly,
another reason that some customers have
reported wanting these cards is because
in very highly secure environments,
they know that you can't basically
listen in on an optical line.
So movie studios, for example,
they're not going might be of interest,
certain three-letter agencies that don't
want people knowing what's passing down
those wires might be a good choice.
You might like it just for the
simple fact that you already
have fiber optic plumbing.
Also available,
SmallTree wrote a driver for
Intel's 10 gigabit Ethernet card,
so if you need 10 gigabit Ethernet
and you want to move very large files,
possibly from one work group to another,
this again has been a very popular
of choice with our customers.
So moving on to high
performance interconnects.
Miranet, you know, have been a long time
developer on the platform.
This is an example of their connectors
and the types of switches they have.
So news from them is that they
expect two new XSERV-based clusters
will appear on the June 2005 list
of the top 500 supercomputers.
So stay tuned for news and
more product news from them.
They've had a lot of success with
their MX message passing framework.
The MX2G has been released for
the PCIX network interface cards.
This is an even lower latency than the
previous generation of cards from them.
They are getting on the order
of 3.6 microseconds signal
latencies over raw hardware,
and only 3.8 microseconds using MPitch.
The MX2G is a great example of
a message-passing framework.
One of the really neat things
about these cards is that you
install them in your system,
and it shows up just like a
configurable network interface card.
You're able to pass your
TCP/IP traffic over that.
They do offer, again,
their own middleware,
and are working on the next generation
MPitch2 MX to be coming soon.
So surprisingly,
they report that Tiger allowed them,
not surprisingly, but very welcome,
they report that Tiger allowed them
to get even better performance.
MX uses a unique approach
to memory management.
So for messages smaller
than 32 kilobytes,
they simply copy it
across from node to node.
Larger messages than that get
pinned and unpinned on demand,
and they say that Tiger's
code made them more efficient.
And that practical on Mac OS X and
allowed them to deliver as much as four
times the memory to the application.
and Kevin They also announced
experimental support for
64-bit binaries on Tiger.
And again, we will stay tuned for news
from them at the Top 500 at the
Supercomputing Conference next month.
So the other high
performance interconnect on
the platform is InfiniBand,
and we are very pleased to welcome
to the platform the combination
of SilverStorm Technologies and
SmallTree Communications,
who have partnered to deliver a
tremendous amount of InfiniBand
options on our platform.
So, who are SilverStorm?
Well, the first thing to tell you about
them is that you probably already
know them as Infinicon Systems.
They were founded in June of 2000,
and again,
originally as Infinicon Systems.
They have sales and support teams
to answer technical questions or to
field customer requests in the US,
Europe and Asia.
They have a very strong emphasis in
high performance technical computing,
or commercial computing field,
so areas like oil and gas.
They offer a complete
solution set for both HPC and
enterprise compute customers.
And we'll explain in a little bit exactly
what that could mean to your data center.
One of the things that could mean
is that through their solutions you
can pull together fiber channel,
Ethernet, and InfiniBand architectures.
And again, we'll show you what that
means in a few minutes.
So who are Smalltree?
So we've already mentioned them once
for their gigabit Ethernet cards.
Smalltree are a hardware and
software development company.
The principles of the company
come from companies like
Cray and SGI and Sun and HP.
They have technology
partnerships in place with Intel,
Silicon and Silverstorm, obviously,
and also have experience
as system integrators.
They have a wide range of offerings that
we've seen from GIGI up to InfiniBand.
And probably the best news here is
that they are focused exclusively
on the Mac OS X platform.
So they've taken a very nice lead in
building network performance on Mac OS X.
So we may have heard a lot about
InfiniBand and exactly what it means.
I can tell you InfiniBand is a very
dense spec with a lot of protocols.
But the vision for InfiniBand
was really building an enterprise
class infrastructure that really
started with a clean sheet of paper.
What if we didn't have to sort of pull
along other networking technologies?
What if we could start with a clean slate
and try to bridge together fiber channel?
This is all made possible
through a very fast,
high bandwidth, low latency interconnect.
And this was originally what
Infinicon was founded on.
So in the center in orange would be
one of their switches that is able
to tie together gigabit Ethernet.
So this is a very simple way to bridge
off to fiber channel storage and bridge
off to high performance applications,
be it for commercial computing
or technical computing.
So they do offer a complete
range of solutions,
starting of course at the very bottom
with the host channel adapters.
This is an example of their
PCIX host channel adapter.
Switches like this that are able
to bridge the I/O infrastructure.
It might be a bit hard
to see in the picture,
but on the left is a modular
chassis that allows you to plug
in gigabit Ethernet in the center,
up to 12 ports of InfiniBand,
and on the right,
two ports of fiber channel.
They of course have a range of
switches ranging from the 1U switches
that make possible very flexible
and very efficient topologies for
designing supercomputer layouts,
and also great big monsters that
will go up to 288 ports as well.
And then to tie all of that together,
they have arranged, so in combination of,
by working with Smalltree
and Silverstorm,
they've pulled together a fantastic
range of software from what
sits directly on top of the HCA,
all the way up to how
you manage the fabric,
and how you enforce things
like quality of service.
So, a complete end-to-end solution.
So what's here now inside
that InfiniBand stack?
Today, as you would expect, MPI is here.
MPI codes run on SilverStorm InfiniBand.
They have also already landed
and fully support VirtualNIC,
so iNIC, and IP over IB,
meaning that you can pass TCP/IP,
any TCP/IP application can
simply run over InfiniBand.
They have also landed SRP,
Storage Resource Protocol,
that allows things like Fiber
Channel to simply plug in using one
of the bridging switches we saw,
and allows InfiniBand clients to reach
out and simply see Fiber Channel storage.
They're faithfully passing through
the Fiber Channel and SCSI protocols.
So one of the things having that
capability unlocks is that we can
have applications like Oracle 10G Rack
sitting up in user land that is
actually running on the Mac OS X.
So that's a great opportunity to have.
So we're going to be reaching
out and seeing storage,
Fiber Channel storage,
but it's all happening over InfiniBand,
and TCP/IP also, same wire,
going over InfiniBand.
So we think it's going to unlock some
very interesting ways for enterprise
and HPC centers to leverage InfiniBand.
So we're actually demonstrating
exactly what I described down
in the data center downstairs.
In one of the racks in the
data center on the first floor,
you will find four XServe cluster nodes
that have Oracle 10G Rack installed.
Oracle 10G Rack is leveraging
storage on an XServe RAID,
and again,
simply by plugging into one of the
InfiniO switches in the bottom.
So while we could plug in fiber channel
off to larger fiber channel switches,
in this case we're simply
plugging directly the two ports
of fiber channel from the XServe
RAID into the InfiniO switch.
That is then simply presented and
available to InfiniBand clients.
And then of course we had
extra ports on the switch,
so we added on up to six
more ports to run HPC codes.
So, not too bad for one one-use switch.
Well done.
What's also exciting and what SilverStorm
bring to the table in working with
Apple is that because of a lot of their
existing emphasis on commercial codes,
they have partnerships in place
with a fantastic portfolio
of companies to work with,
including Fluent, Ansys, and Abacus,
and they have committed to help
drive these applications to Mac OS X,
and naturally we'll be looking for
customers that are ready to do that.
We're ready to help them.
Um...
In the IPC middleware arena,
moving slightly up the stack,
we have a very broad range,
very large toolkit to choose from.
Each of the hardware vendors, of course,
have a version of MPI that is
tightly integrated to their hardware.
But other major news is OpenMPI,
this is the next generation MPI from
the people who brought you LAMMPI,
has announced it is on the
platform and have even said that
they're working on XGrid support.
So thank you for that.
We have mVapage, the mVapage team at
Ohio State have conducted a very,
very fast run, in fact,
might even be the fastest
networking speed recorded on a Mac,
in excess of 900 megabytes per second
and latencies under six microseconds.
So a lot of fantastic work.
We have a lot of great work
going on at the mVapage program,
Dr.
DK Panda and his team at Ohio State.
In the area of code libraries,
probably the major news here
is that if you do anything,
if you use BLAS levels 1, 2 or 3, LAPAC,
if you do any type of
digital signal processing,
if you do fast Fourier transforms,
you should really
leverage Dash Accelerate.
So the Accelerate framework delivered
in Tiger is absolutely your friend.
A little bit later,
Rodney Mock of Absoft will
take you through and talk about
some of the IMSL math libraries
that Absoft will deliver.
So in the area of file systems,
the state of the art
kernel in Tiger has landed,
has yielded even better performance
for NFS and AFP on the platform.
XSAN has been a very compelling choice.
It is being tested and used in
a number of HPC installations.
A common way to do this would be to
make each head node on top of a rack of
other compute nodes the client on XSAN,
and now they can all now see and
pass along and share shared storage.
Lustre, on the heels of announcing that
they had worked on Panther,
have done the same,
and are now in beta stage on Tiger,
and are, if large scale file systems
like Lustre are of interest,
I encourage you to contact them.
They are looking forward
to working on Tiger.
Lastly, I'll mention Blaze.
Blaze is a network file system
offering from the guys at Smalltree.
It is their goal to make network
file transfers very fast,
and I encourage you to check that out.
That was just announced this Monday.
In the area of resource management,
I have to absolutely encourage
you to check out Xgrid.
People are using Xgrid in
some very interesting ways.
It already comes from Apple.
It's built in a Mac OS X server,
so leverage that if you can.
Moab, the commercial,
it can be grossly oversimplified to think
of it as the commercial version of Maui.
Moab was released this year.
They substantially re-architected
what happens under the hood.
Very recently, the team at Oscar HA at
Louisiana State have said that they,
in conjunction with the OpenMPI team,
are now going to tackle
Oscar HA on Mac OS X.
So expect news on that.
Okay.
In the tool space,
obviously Tiger delivered a fantastic
version of Xcode with GCC and GDB 4.0.
Some very important news is this year,
Etnis have released their Totalview
parallel debugger on the platform.
And in fact,
they accompanied us on a road show
where we went to several major cities,
and people got a chance to
see Etnis Totalview in action.
Absoft have a very nice
portfolio of tools,
and what I would like to do is
go ahead and invite Rodney Mock,
who is the Absoft HPC Technical Director,
to come up and tell us more about
what they have coming up next.
Rodney.
Rodney Mock: Thank you.
Nice, John.
Thanks Skip.
I'm Rod Mock,
I'm Absoft HPC Technical Director.
So if you haven't heard about Absoft,
we've had continuous tool support
on the Apple platform since 1984.
We've been there through
the various transitions,
including the transition to PowerPC.
We're going to be there for
the transition on Intel,
so you'll be seeing tools from Absoft
for the Mac on Intel coming forth.
And we've also done the
first commercial Fortran,
Fortran 95 compilers.
For the Mac platform,
we'll have a full Fortran 2003 compiler
also available on the Mac platform
and intend to be the first there.
And we are going to be continuing
development of cutting edge developer and
high performance tools for OS X Tiger.
Some of the Absoft solutions that
we've done on the platform are
our High Performance Computing
Software Development Kit for
XServe clusters.
This is a kit that will bundle
together the best of breed solutions
available for the platform,
make it all easy to
install in less than five,
six seconds.
You'll be able to install this kit,
have all the compilers, debuggers,
math libraries and other tools that you
need to do to optimize on the platform.
And we'll talk about each of these
in detail here in a few minutes.
Another thing that we've announced at
this conference is our FXP MPI Parallel
Debugger for OS X Tiger and Panther.
You'll be able to debug basic
MPI codes with this debugger.
It's a low-cost entry-level
debugger from Absoft.
You can also get Total View,
which Skip talked about.
If you need to move up to the next level,
do hybrid debugging,
more advanced type codes,
that solution is also
available from Absoft.
64-bit and 32-bit Pro Fortran
compiled for Tiger.
Right on the heels of Tiger,
we released our 64-bit Fortran compiler,
as well as our other tools.
This is available right now.
You can download it if you need
to do 64-bit development on Tiger.
You can use our tools and
immediately take advantage
of the 64-bit capabilities.
We're also announcing the 64-bit and
32-bit IMSL Fortran numerical libraries,
version 5.0,
with serial and MPI support for XServe.
If you're currently using
IMSL on the Mac platform,
want to take advantage of your cluster,
it makes it very easy to use with MPI.
It hides a lot of the MPI complexity
away from the user and lets you take
advantage of the resources that you have.
[Transcript missing]
Some other best of breed
components that are included,
we have MPish2, LAMMPI,
we'll also be supporting
OpenMPI and other various
MPIs as they come out in the kit.
We have the 64-bit and
32-bit IMSL libraries,
as well as Absoft Pro4chan
we discussed earlier.
We also have available VAST.
VAST has two technologies.
One is VAST AlteVec,
which is bundled on the CD.
This lets you do
auto-vectorization for your codes.
If you have a code,
you want to be able to take
advantage of the AlteVec unit,
but you're not familiar
with how to do it,
you can just run it through VAST.
It'll automatically
auto-vectorize your code for you.
It gives you good diagnostics
to tell you why certain parts of
your code couldn't be vectorized.
For example, if you have possible pointer
early seeing or other reasons,
and helps you kind of work your
way through to get even higher
performance out of your code.
It also has another tool that's automatic
parallelization and OpenMP support.
It'll go through your code,
automatically parallelizes
the parts that it feels that
you can gain performance on.
If you want to use
handwritten OpenMP directives,
you can also compile your code
using VAST to support OpenMP.
The next product that we announced
is our FXP MPI Parallel Debugger.
It's built on our FX2 serial
debugger that supports all the major
compiler vendors on all platforms.
It also supports all the
major MPI implementations all
in one easy to use package.
It is very easy to use,
it's very sharp looking
based on the Aqua interface.
If you want to see a sneak
preview of this debugger,
please come on Friday to the
parallel debugging session.
We'll be able to show it to you,
and you can enter in our beta program
to help us beta this this month.
If you need a higher level debugger,
like I mentioned before,
TotalView is available,
and we can make that,
that's available through
AppSoft and supported as well.
It has some unique features.
One is automatically
attached to MPI processes.
This is very popular,
so you don't have to figure out what
your PIDs are on different nodes.
It will automatically attach to
whatever MPI processes are out there,
present it to one easy-to-use interface,
so you'll be able to
step through your code,
run on various, you know,
view the registers, variables,
stack on all the different nodes,
all through the same interface.
It also has a visual element that lets
you see what the state of your nodes are.
It has like a color-coded scheme,
so you can see which nodes are
dead or possibly deadlocked.
Other various easy-to-use visual
elements that help you quickly
identify problems with your code.
[Transcript missing]
Absoft Pro Fortran,
this also was released
on the heels of Tiger.
Like I said, it has 64-bit and 32-bit
support for Fortran 95.
It includes free technical
support from Absoft,
which is one of our, you know,
we have very good tech support.
We support all the products,
including on these various HPC SDKs,
Total View, all are supported
centrally through Absoft.
It includes C, C++ compilers.
It has an IDE that's
cross-platform on Windows,
Linux, and other platforms,
including our FX2 graphical
debugger is included at no charge.
It has Blast libraries, Atlas, HDF,
other libraries that make it
easy to use on the platform,
and it is fully link compatible with GNU.
Finally,
the IMSO Fortran Numerical Library.
This has a complete set of
scientific algorithms and routines.
Instead of having to hand code your own,
they have a vast array of these
routines that you can use.
They're already pre-validated
for the platform,
so you know you can
get the correct answer.
They have excellent documentation.
If you want to then scale up,
if you get a cluster with a few
simple modifications to your code,
you can then have MPI support,
and it hides much of
this complexity from you.
It handles bundling up,
packaging the arrays,
setting them out to the nodes.
All you have to know is,
"I want to solve this problem.
Here's the algorithm that I want to
use." You leave the rest to IMSL.
So roadmap going forward.
Of course, we're going to be
supporting the Mac on Intel.
That's going to be a
very big push for us.
We're going to have full Fortran
2003 support on the platform.
We're going to be increasingly
improving our speed of our compilers,
tools and utilities, of course,
on the platform.
Continued emphasis on our technical
support and introduction of some new
HPC tools that you can look forward
to seeing this time next year.
So thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Rod.
Okay.
So we did a quick run through
of the technology stacks,
but what we're really trying
to get at is your applications.
We're trying to get at what exactly,
what challenge it is, what question it is
you're trying to answer.
There are a tremendous
amount of technologies,
tremendous amount of applications
that hit the platform.
Some of them commercial,
some of them open source.
But what we want to do here today was
introduce you to technology that looks
to be very promising in the HPC arena.
And to show that to you,
I'd like to ask Kevin Howard from
Massively Parallel to join
us and give us a look.
Kevin?
Thank you.
Okay, I'm Kevin Howard from Astle
Loop Parallel Technologies.
We're going to show a demo,
but first I have to tell you,
since this is an Apple audience,
that it's going to be ugly, really ugly,
because it doesn't have flashy
graphics or anything like that.
It's just going to show
one impossible thing.
So hopefully that one impossible thing
will be compelling enough so that you,
or at least Apple,
invites me here again sometime.
Okay, why massively parallel technology?
What do we do?
Where do we come from?
Nobody's ever heard of us.
Well, our technology really is
based upon years of research.
We've been around for, I think,
six years now.
Primary funding came from the
Defense Advanced Projects Agency,
DARPA.
What we did is we derived a
new version of Amdahl's Law.
What this version does,
the standard version of Amdahl's
Law is kind of pathetic.
Everybody in here who does high
performance computing knows that if
you open up a parallelization book,
in chapter one, page three,
it will say Amdahl's Law,
and you never see it again.
Why is that?
That's because Amdahl's
Law does not fundamentally
talk about number of channels,
speed of channels, latency issues.
How physical topologies are connected up,
or any of the other real issues
that face practitioners of the art.
And because it really only
talks about two items,
it talks about Amdahl's fraction,
which is the percentage
of parallel activity,
and it talks about the number of nodes.
That's kind of useless
for doing real work.
What we do is we've taken this new model.
This derivative.
Found out how it works in
terms of complete overlap,
overlapping communication
and computation,
and overlaid that with
different communication models.
We'll show you some of those models,
not all of them, but just a few of them
to give you a flavor.
These are, of course, proprietary,
but so what?
What we're going to show here are
a number of applications with true,
what we call true super-linear,
capability.
What do I mean by true
super-linear capability?
What I mean is it is not a
function of cache effects.
Super-linearity that comes
right from Amdahl's Law,
and it comes right from the algorithms
themselves if done properly.
Okay, basically our technology is kind
of instantiated in a number of
libraries because like everyone else,
we want to hide how hard
it is to actually do this
stuff because it is hard.
What we want to do is show that you
can get much higher performing systems
using some of these techniques.
In fact, what we're going to show
is something kind of silly.
In the world of high bandwidth,
low latency systems,
we have a machine over there
where we just are using 100BaseT.
And we're going to show at
least one application with
super linear performance.
We're going to show some pictures in a
few minutes of some performance graphs on
real machines also using just 100BaseT.
We're talking 80 nodes,
that sort of thing, so a reasonable size.
A number of applications with
super linear performance.
Okay, well here's the first one.
Doesn't,
in fact we're going to show E to the X.
Why do we choose E to the X?
A friend of mine, John Gustafson,
who's been in the high
performance computing community
for pretty much forever,
and he works for a competing company,
so I won't mention it.
He ran E to the X on his
competing companies machine,
and what they found is that it
doesn't really scale very well.
Why?
Because unlike Pi and other things like
that where Ramanujan was good enough
to give us solutions that you collect,
compute the last digit,
and so you can spread that
over multiple machines,
unfortunately E to the X is a
true series expansion problem,
so you have these huge series expansions,
and you have to do the
cross-summing all the way through.
And so it doesn't really scale greatly.
It scales okay,
but it doesn't scale greatly.
What we were able to do,
this is with two channels,
and we'll explain why.
200 base T channels on fast machines,
80 of them,
and the effect of that machine was to
have performance that was near 140 times,
140 machines is what the equivalent was.
So we had 80 machines that
were acting like this,
and we had to do a lot of
work to get it to work.
And so we had 100 machines that
were acting like 140 machines.
How can that be?
[Transcript missing]
Okay, here's our first little,
our simple cascading model.
Why are we showing this?
It doesn't look like much.
It looks kind of like
just a tree architecture,
right?
Except that if you look
at a standard B-tree,
binary tree architecture,
the expansion rate is 1, 2, 4, 8, etc.
You can go play over there.
This is Glenn.
He'll be playing the Mac for you today.
This model here,
the growth rate of how many nodes
are in communication per unit time,
oh and by the way that thing that says
home node is really our version of a
head node or something analogous to that.
It's not really part
of the communication.
But its growth rate for
a single channel is 1,
3, 7, 15, 31,
etc., etc., which is basically 1
minus 2 times faster than a B-tree.
What the heck does that mean?
Since what it means on a single
channel is that prior to our discovery,
our company's discovery of this pattern,
the binary tree was considered for
a single channel to be the best
expansion rate you're going to.
So we're going to be able to have this.
This is showing the effects of
just adding a single additional
[Transcript missing]
The number of channels that
are involved in a communication
model have a non-linear effect
on the speed of your system.
A nonlinear effect.
In fact, the nonlinear effect is--
we're going to do the demo,
so you might as well start.
Can you switch over to
demo one so that he can,
oh, you've already done that.
The reason I'm just showing you,
I told you it was going to be ugly, guys.
He just ran a quickie little
version of E to the X.
We're only showing 300
digits because it goes nuts,
but this has 65,000 digits of precision.
And it took, on a single node,
it took 160 seconds.
What we're going to do
is now run it on three,
run it on seven nodes,
that machine right there.
We're running it on seven nodes.
Let's see.
You know,
it takes a long time when you're standing
up here and waiting for a machine to
write little green numbers on the screen,
but there you go.
Okay, it's done.
Now, it took 17 seconds for seven nodes,
so if we do the math,
we have a little calculator here.
If you do the math...
You can see that our seven
machines acts as if we had nine.
But that to me is pretty cool.
I don't know about you, but.
So where are we going with this?
How are we going to provide this
kind of capability to the community?
What kind of other things
can we do with this?
Of course, we're doing bioinformatics.
We're building right now a very
large bioinformatics website
application to try before you buy.
It'll be made of, of course,
Apple clusters.
Molecular modeling,
it turns out that our method of,
we call it beta phase,
overlapped I/O and communication
and computation model,
using some of these cheap tricks,
allows us to do molecular
modeling that scales,
in most cases, super linearly,
but there are some cases where it will
scale just a little under sub-linearly.
Oh well, can't have it all.
Not everything's scalable.
It doesn't scale super linearly,
I will say that.
It depends on the underlying
nature of the algorithm.
We do a lot of image processing today.
Naturally doing things with DARPA,
what they want us to do is
find stuff in bizarre places.
And I can't tell anybody,
including my wife,
what I'm actually looking at.
What did you see today?
Nothing.
So neural networks,
the reason why neural networks are
particularly nice for us is because
they're an order n squared problem.
And it turns out that the
mathematical order of the problem,
depending on certain aspects,
but the mathematical order of
the problem is what's generating
the super linear effect.
It's the order of the problem because
what's happening is that acts as a
nonlinear decreaser of the amount
of work that's being calculated
when you break the problem up.
Seismic processing,
we've already heard about that.
We've already shown very,
very good effects with Kirchhoff
time migration codes and other codes.
I know that those are -- that that's
an embarrassingly parallel mechanism,
but using some of our I/O models,
we were able to show a 10x
increase on the same cluster over
existing -- several existing codes.
And computational fluid dynamics models,
these are very, very tough codes,
mainly because of the very,
very small number of bytes that are
being transmitted between pieces
and parts during the computation.
You just don't move a lot of data.
And of course,
if you don't move a lot of data,
then scaling becomes an issue
because all your latency builds up.
In our model,
we found some relatively unique ways
of being able to continue to mask
the communication time completely,
which means that even though we're
moving small amounts of data,
including around the system, it's okay.
So we are --
As I said,
we are just now coming to market.
That's why we don't have
a lot of flashy stuff.
We've been around again
for a very long time.
We've been primarily working
on mathematical models of
computation and how those models
interact with numbers of nodes.
We've found several effects
that we think are novel.
The effects really revolve
around this notion that if
you give me two slow channels,
I can make them work much
faster than one fast channel.
If you give me two fast channels,
I can make wonders occur because
the effect occurs regardless
of the speed of the channel.
So I know I'm not
consuming all of my time,
but you know, I'm done talking.
Thank you, Kevin.
So I hope you enjoyed that sneak peek.
It's not often you get to see what
DARPA actually gets to work on.
[Transcript missing]
There are some great resources where we
can exchange this type of information.
The Apple SciTech list is really sort
of the granddaddy of HPC at Apple.
It's where a tremendous
amount of HPC-oriented and
obviously science-oriented
communication takes place.
Since HPC did receive so much activity,
this year we actually
created an Apple HPC list.
So these can both be found at
lists.apple.com and receive a
tremendous amount of traffic,
users helping users,
tremendous amount of Apple engineers
sign on and actually provide
expertise on those lists as well.
So that should really be
something you monitor continually.
The HPC page at
developer.apple.com is found at
developer.apple.com/hardware/HPC.
Success stories, how-tos,
that sort of thing are the types
of material you'll find there.
And of course the
Apple and Science website,
apple.com/science,
is another fantastic resource.
So you can find all of that there.
And of course,
we also have a lot of resources that
you can use to keep up with the data
and what's happening on the platform.
We mentioned a couple
of sessions earlier.
I would recommend that you
check out the large installation
and HPC systems admin session.
We have a small InfiniBand cluster
in the Enterprise IT lab for you to
use and ask questions of that team.
The Xgrid session looks fantastic.
Using Xgrid, create and deploy
distributed computations.
Using Xgrid session on Friday, again,
another excellent session.
And if you would like a peek
at FXP that Rodney showed you
earlier and Etnis TotalView,
I highly recommend you check out the
debugging parallel application session.
That's also the session where we
will be giving details of how you can
get your hands on the memory manager
code that was discussed earlier.
and if all else fails,
I strongly encourage you
to contact skip@apple.com.
Incredibly easy email to remember.
I look forward to helping you
engage the resources at Apple and
being of help wherever I can.
I want to thank all of the
Apple HPC developer partners,
customers that are here.